---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/EXAM REVIEWS/SUBJECT/Physics 11/1.5 2-D Kinematics/","created":"2026-03-09T05:57:04.156-04:00","updated":"2026-04-05T17:13:21.100-04:00","dg-note-properties":{}}
---

2026-03-09 05:57

Status: #new 

Tags: #physic

# 2-D Kinematics
#### Composition Method
- Composition Method outlines a method that takes calculations of x and y values separately, all connected through the concept of time :O. 
- Here's how it can be done:
	- The initial velocity ($\vec{v_i}$) of object x is A m/s at 30 degrees.
	- We can identity the x and y components through cosine and sine.
		- $\vec{v_{i_x}}$ = $\vec{v_i} \ cos(30^{\circ})$  
		- $\vec{v_{i_y}}$ = $\vec{v_i} \ sin(30^{\circ})$  
	 - In addition, this can also be applied to the concept of acceleration
		 - If we know that $\vec{v_{f_x}}$ = C m/s, then it can be inferred that a $\vec{v_{f_x}}$ = $\vec{v_{i_x}} + \vec{a_x} \Delta t$ 
		 - The same can concur for y: $\vec{v_{f_y}}$ = $\vec{v_{i_y}} + \vec{a_y} \Delta t$ 
	- Notice that theres no degrees in the x and y sections?
		- Thats the power of **composition**, which enables this 
- Calculating Acceleration and Pythagoras
	- If we can calculate only $\vec{a_x}$ or $\vec{a_y}$ , then we are severely limited. Theres a easy way to deal with this however... 
		- $\vec{a} = \sqrt{\vec{a_x}+\vec{a_y}} \ [\theta_a]$ given that $[\theta_a]=tan^{-1} (\frac{\vec{a_y}}{a_x})$ 
	- This concept can be applied to ALL of kinematics!
#### X and Y Tables
- Now that we have a mechanism to determine x and y and how to fuse them together, now we need an organized method of organizing those x and y's:
	- 
<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><a class="markdown-embed-link" href="/Excalidraw/Velocity Tables (x and y)/" aria-label="Open link"><svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="svg-icon lucide-link"><path d="M10 13a5 5 0 0 0 7.54.54l3-3a5 5 0 0 0-7.07-7.07l-1.72 1.71"></path><path d="M14 11a5 5 0 0 0-7.54-.54l-3 3a5 5 0 0 0 7.07 7.07l1.71-1.71"></path></svg></a><div class="markdown-embed">




==⚠  Switch to EXCALIDRAW VIEW in the MORE OPTIONS menu of this document. ⚠== You can decompress Drawing data with the command palette: 'Decompress current Excalidraw file'. For more info check in plugin settings under 'Saving'


# Excalidraw Data

## Text Elements
X and Y Tables 
Velocity Vector 
X 
Y 
21 m/s 
deg 30 
21cos(30) 
21sin(30) 
12 m/s 
deg 100 
12cos(100) 
12sin(100) 
+ 18.186 
+ 10.5 
-2.083 
+ 11.27 
22 m/s N 
16 m/s E 
## Embedded Files
c034f1eedf5e2465b2c283e42aac115a15a61f5d: $$\sum$$



</div></div>

	- Given that say these two velocity vectors are the only vectors in our problem, using the pythagorean theorem method used in acceleration (see above)
		- We can determine the resultant velocity vector
#### Subtraction of Vectors
- We know that $\vec{a} = \frac{\vec{v_f}-\vec{v_i}}{\Delta t}$ 
	- If we want to take the X and Y tables, we will have to subtract??. Now thats confusing. Hence we rewrite say -12cos(100) as + (-12cos100)
		- This leads to + (12cos280) or heck even + (12cos10)
	- Really, thats all there is to it:
		- Takeaway: (Vectors can be added and subtracted)
#### Projectile Motion
- In Projectile motions, we can always assume that the horizontal acceleration DNE. This implies that there is a constant horizontal motion. The real calculations occur with the vertical motion. Time links up the x and y components.
	- Acceleration is always calculated given $g = -9.8m/{s^2}$  where "-" represents a downward vertical motion
	- There are also a few adapted formulas and some key takeaways that can be observed:
- **Greatest Maximums**
	- A greatest maximum is defined by
		- $h_{max} = \frac{\vec{v_{yi}}}{19.6}$ 
# References
