---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/EXAM REVIEWS/SUBJECT/Bio 11/3.2 The Digestive System/","created":"2026-04-14T20:39:24.622-04:00","updated":"2026-04-21T06:33:30.041-04:00","dg-note-properties":{}}
---

 2026-04-14 20:39

Status: #new

Tags: #digestivesystem #animals #biology

# The Digestive System

## Digestion
#### 4 Steps of digestion
##### Ingestion
- For simple organisms, they have gastrovascular cavities, where nutrients and waste end up using the same opening
- In more complex organisms, they have a alimentary cavity, where nutrients enters one end and, and waste exits the other.
##### Digestion
###### Pre-Intestine
- In humans, we have a mouth, consisting of a physical part (teeth/tongue) and a chemical part (saliva) to break down food.
- The tongue and teeth break food down into smaller pieces
- Saliva aids in digestion and helps moisturize (acts a lubricant) food so it goes down faster
	- It also contains amylose, to break down food starches.
	- As it dissolves food particles, it also stimulates taste buds.
		- 5 tastes that are **evenly** distributed in the tongue 
			- Sweet, salty, bitter, sour, umami (savour)
- The tongue is covered in papillae, which are covered in taste buds.
- Uvula - When swallowing, it moves to block the nasal cavity.
- Epiglottis - A flap of tissue that covers the pathway to the lungs
- Esophagus -Muscles that push food down in a wave pattern known as peristalsis.
	- Food gets pushed down into the stomach
	- 3 Layers of muscle squeeze the contents of the stomach
- The stomach secretes. fluid to help in digestion
	- HCL, KCL, NaCL and other digestive enzymes (pepsin) are dissolved in water
- The stomach creates a thick mucus lining that creates a protective layer against stomach acid
- Acid Reflux
	- Capsaicin (from chilli peppers) dissolves in oil rather than in water, so both sit on top of the water (made worse by fatty or spicy foods)
- Heartburn
	- Caused by acid moving up the body, which can be neutralized with a base. 
- When an organism **lacks a mouth** it may have something called a gizzard (in addition to the stomach)
	- ie. Birds consume tiny rocks that are stored in this gizzard to help crush food.
- Chyme - A highly mixed slushy substance of grinded down food
- Cud - Vomit that certain organisms such as birds chew to break down more nutrients
##### The small intestine
- Chyme enters the small intestine, where digestion can be completed
###### Duodenum
- The pancreas and gall bladder secrete additional enzymes into the duodenum to complete digestion.
	- Carbohydrates (amylase), proteases, lipases (mainly from gall bladder)
	- Without a pancreas and gallbladder
		- There wouldn't be energy needed for cellular respiration
- Pancreas - Responsible for making insulin (regulates certain nutrients)
###### Jejunum
- This is where digestion stops, as no more enzymes are created
- Mesentery - Thin tissues holding the small intestines in place
	- Ensures that the small intestines don't tangle
    - Holds all parts of the small intestine
#### Absorption
- Occurs in the small intestine
	- The inside of every small intestine is folded, for more surface area
- Each fold is covered by finger-like projections (Villi)
- Villi:
	- Blood Vessels (Absorb water-soluble nutrients to transport to the rest of the body)
	- Lacteal (A network of blood vessels that absorb fat-soluble molecules)
	- Pink Area (Chyme travels through this)
    - Microvilli - Finger-like projection of cells on the surface of the villii
	    - Is bumpy, with each bump having its own fingers
	    - Each cell in the microvilli has their own hair
- Ileum
	- Where digestion stops, and where absorption takes place
#### Elimination
- Any nutrient that does not get sucked into the blood steam has to be eliminated.
- This starts in the large intestine (also known as the colon)
##### Large Intestine
- Caecum, Ascending/Transverse/Descending Colon, Rectum, Anus
- Components not absorbed pass through the **ileocecal valve**.
- Appendix: A small tail as the end of the Secum, projection at the bottom of the Caecum.
- Caecum - Pouch that marks the beginning of the colon
- 90% of water passing through the colon is reabsorbed.
- Indigestible plant matter is broken down by bacteria in the colon.
- Gases released by bacteria contributes to the odour of feces.
- Antibiotics can kill bacteria regardless of its benefit, so eating healthy is needed in order to replenish the gut microbiome in the colon.
- Feces is stored in the rectum until elimination through anal sphincter (anus)
- Coprophagy (Rabbits eat their own feces)
#### Digestive System Disorders
- Colonoscopy - Used to diagnose IBD such as Crohn's or Ulcerative Colitis
- Endoscopy - Examine upper gastrointestinal tract
- Peptic Ulcers - Observed in the stomach
- Canker Sores - Painful sores in the mouth that heal quickly
- Capsule Endoscope - Ingested Camera that goes into the digestive system
- Ulcers - Heliobacter pylori are responsible for peptic disorders
- Jaundice - Yellow Pigmentation on the skin
	- Hepatitis (liver disease induced jaundice)
	- Babies can get jaundice as their blood type attacks other blood during labour
	- It is fixed by sticking babies in a box, shining on them, and letting babies excrete it out of their system.
- Dark Urine - Urine without a colour range
	- Normal Urine is clear and transparent
- Edema - Water collecting in the limbs, appears swollen
- Liver - Healthy to eat (lots of iron and nutrition)
	- Blood Test - Gives a clear indication that a liver is not functioning, which is useful given early liver damage exhibits very few symptoms
	- Responsible for detoxification
	- Enzymes break down chemicals typically not found in the system
	- A increase in enzyme concentrations makes it work harder


# References
[[EXAM REVIEWS/SUBJECT/Bio 11/3.0 Animal Molecules\|3.0 Animal Molecules]]
[[EXAM REVIEWS/SUBJECT/Bio 11/3.1 Animal feeding\|3.1 Animal feeding]]