---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/EXAM REVIEWS/SUBJECT/Bio 11/4.3 Plant Organs/","created":"2026-05-13T18:54:20.484-04:00","updated":"2026-05-13T21:27:46.565-04:00","dg-note-properties":{}}
---

2026-05-13 18:55

Status: #new

Tags: #biology #plants

# Plant Organs
### Roots
###### Root Function
- Water and dissolved mineral uptake
- Plant anchorage
- Carbohydrate, water and nutrient storage
###### Root Structure
- Root Cap $\rightarrow$ the tip of the root that protects growing tissues and can extend through resistant materials
- Cortex $\rightarrow$ Vascular Tissue is centralized in the centre of the root
	- Dermal tissue forces water towards the cortex
- **Monocot** xylem tubes are in a ring
- **Dicot** xylem tubes are in a x-shape
### Stems
#### Stem Types
###### Tubers
- Enlarged portions of underground stems
###### Bulbs
- Short underground stems
###### Corm
- Short underground stems
###### Stolons
- Horizontal stems above the ground
###### Rhizomes
- Horizontal stems found underground
A key difference between bulbs and corms is that bulbs have layers, both are papery on the outside, both are found underground, corms are more solid.
###### Monocot vs Dicot Stems
- Vasc. bundles scattered in Monocot, Dicot is a circular structure
#### Stem roots and applications
###### Tap root
- A single thick root in Dicots that grows deep into the soil
###### Fibrous root
- Many smaller shallow roots that maximize surface area
###### Stem Structure
- Stems support leaves and reproductive structure
- Associated with vertical structures with consistent diameter
###### Grafting
- Exposes vascular tissues, so you can put a new plant to create a new plant
##### Roots vs Stems
- This is done through cross examining plant tissues. The type of cell in which the bulging structure enlarges determines classification.
### Leaves
- Leaves appear in a variety of sizes and patterns. They share similar placements of cellular tissue.
#### Epidermal and Phloem structures
- Epidermal cells secrete a waxy substance to generate a cuticle layer.
	- Reduces evaporation rate
- Between the top and bottom epidermal layers are **ground cells** which are responsible for photosynthesis.
###### Mesophyll Types
- Palisade Mesophyll $\rightarrow$ Tightly-packed tall cells at the top of the leaf
- Spongy Mesophyll $\rightarrow$ Loosely packed, round cells below the palisade mesophyll
###### Vascular Phloem
- Vascular bundles contain xylem and phloem, and run through the leaf for water and nutrient exchange
###### Monocot vs Dicot
- Monocots have parallel vein structures
- Dicots have branching vein structures
##### Simple Leaves
- Are a single structure. They may be a single blade or they may haves or they may be divided
##### Compound Leaves
- Compound leaves consist of multiple petioles (leaf stalks) extending from the main stem. 
	- A leaf of a compound leaf is a "leaflet"
# References
